1. What is HTTP?

HTTP (HyperText Transfer Protocol) is a communication protocol used for transferring web pages and other content over the internet.

It defines how messages are formatted and transmitted between a client (like a web browser) and a web server.

Example: When you type http://example.com, your browser sends an HTTP request to the server to fetch the webpage.



---

2. What is HTTPS?

HTTPS (HyperText Transfer Protocol Secure) is the secure version of HTTP.

It encrypts the data exchanged between the browser and the server using SSL/TLS to protect against eavesdropping or tampering.

Example: https://www.google.com — all communication between you and Google’s servers is encrypted.



---

3. What is FTP used for?

FTP (File Transfer Protocol) is used to transfer files between computers over a network.

Common uses:

Uploading files to a web server.

Downloading files from a remote server.


It works in client-server mode: one computer runs an FTP client, and another runs an FTP server.



---

4. What port numbers do HTTP, HTTPS, and FTP use?

Protocol	Default Port Number	Description

HTTP	80	Standard web traffic
HTTPS	443	Secure web traffic using SSL/TLS
FTP	21 (control), 20 (data)	Used for file transfer (control and data connections)



---

5. What is the main difference between HTTP and HTTPS?

Feature	HTTP	HTTPS

Security	Not secure (data sent as plain text)	Secure (data encrypted using SSL/TLS)
Port	80	443
URL Prefix	http://	https://
Use Case	Non-sensitive data	Sensitive or private data (e.g., banking, login pages)



---

6. What protocol provides security to HTTPS?

HTTPS uses SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) or its newer version TLS (Transport Layer Security) to provide encryption, authentication, and data integrity.


---

7. What is SSL/TLS?

SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) and TLS (Transport Layer Security) are cryptographic protocols that:

Encrypt data between client and server.

Authenticate the server (and sometimes the client).

Ensure integrity, preventing data from being modified in transit.


> ⚙️ TLS is the modern, more secure successor to SSL.




---

8. How do you simulate these protocols in Packet Tracer?

In Cisco Packet Tracer, you can simulate these as follows:

For HTTP/HTTPS

1. Add a Web Server and a PC to the workspace.


2. Connect them with appropriate cables and assign IP addresses.


3. On the server, enable HTTP and/or HTTPS services from the Services tab.


4. On the PC, open the Web Browser and type:

http://[server IP] for HTTP

https://[server IP] for HTTPS



5. Observe the packets in Simulation Mode to view protocol details.



For FTP

1. Add an FTP Server and a PC.


2. On the server, enable the FTP service and create a user account.


3. On the PC, open the Command Prompt and type:

ftp [server IP]


4. Enter username and password, then use commands like:

dir    (to list files)
get    (to download)
put    (to upload)


5. Observe the FTP packets in Simulation Mode.




---

9. How can you test file transfer using FTP?

In Packet Tracer:

1. Enable FTP service on the server.


2. Connect a PC to the same network.


3. Use the PC’s Command Prompt → ftp command.


4. After logging in, use:

put filename → Upload a file

get filename → Download a file



5. Watch the event list or simulation window to confirm file transfer.




---

10. What information can be seen in the packet details?

In Simulation Mode, when you click on a packet:

Source and Destination IP/MAC addresses

Protocol used (HTTP, HTTPS, FTP, TCP, etc.)

Port numbers (e.g., 80, 443, 21, 20)

TCP flags (SYN, ACK, etc.)

Encapsulation details (Ethernet, IP, TCP/UDP, Application layer)

Payload data (if visible)
